Dvorák composed his cello concerto in the United States in 1895. This concerto was a great success at its premiere, a success that has continued to accompany him ever since.
It has become a kind of must-have for great performers. Brahms himself, having heard it, would have exclaimed:
"Why wasn't I told that one could write a cello concerto like this? If only I had known, I would have written one long ago."
After writing this concerto, Dvorák never wrote another concerto! This one shines like a lonely star, all inwardly.
He was deeply marked by nostalgia for his homeland. However, Dvorák did not let his art give way and take over his mood, and optimism always regained the upper hand.
The first movement is distinguished by the unusual length of its orchestral introduction, which seems to have been made in preparation for the striking entrance of the soloist.
The cello's first notes are firm and peremptory, and the development that follows goes through powerful moods, developing a melodic richness that reaches lyricism .
The second movement, introduced and sustained with melancholic gentleness by the wind section, develops a sumptuous melody on the cello (a deep but controlled emotion). An orchestral tutti appears suddenly.
Then a new melodic theme unfolds, also of great beauty. Dvorák may have composed or modified this movement after receiving news of the serious illness of his sister-in-law, Josefina Cermakova, with whom he had been in love before his marriage...
In the last movement, the orchestra and the soloist train each other in an upward momentum of heroic vigour. The whole evolves, interspersed with more pensive passages, notably the cello coda, which Dvorák is said to have added after the announcement of the death of his beloved sister-in-law.
But irresistibly the tone rises in joyfulness to the final conclusion, perhaps foreshadowing the happiness of the return home.
Silent Wood is a lyrical piece that comes with time "Slow and very singing" for the introduction, a dream theme in D flat major, recovered after a (slightly rougher) interlude in C sharp minor.
The initial project, Op. 68, took place in 1883 at the request of Fritz Simrock. Famous for his arrangements of popular works for other instruments,
Dvořák arranged the fifth piece for cello and piano during a farewell tour that was prepared with violinist Ferdinand Lachner and cellist Hanus Wihan, before setting sail for the New World.
The arrangement became so famous that Dvořák made a new arrangement for cello and orchestra.
The couple Barenboim / Du Pré married in 1967 and were celebrated as the darlings of the classical music world. Their story was one of youth, glamour and passion - and their romance was compared to that of Robert and Clara Schumann.
But in the space of two years, Jacqueline Du Pré became ill. She underwent a very simple and minor operation, totally without difficulty, but for which she was given a general anaesthetic, and when she woke up she had no more sensation in certain parts of her body.
The couple met in London at the home of pianist Fou Ts'ong, a mutual friend (and son-in-law of Yehudi Menuhin). Barenboim says: "There was chamber music and before we spoke, we sat down to play together - we played a Brahms sonata - and we understood each other musically, perfectly.
She was "a unique musician," he continues. "She wasn't exactly familiar with what to do with music in a musicological or scientific way, but she had an astonishing instinct and speed of mind that was mind-boggling. She was seeing a piece for the first time and she was able not only to play the notes but also to get to the point".
Nicknamed "la Ginette Neveu du violoncelle" (the Ginette Neveu of the Cello) by Paul Tortelier, Jacqueline Du Pré has had a dazzling career, shattered by illness at only 27 years of age.  END